---
title: "MyDoom"
author: "Ferdinand Theil"
# authorAvatarPath: "/avatar.jpeg"
date: 2022-08-27T22:12:13+01:00
summary: "A simple sumary"
description: "A simple description"
toc: true
readTime: true
autonumber: true
math: true
tags: ["Malware", "History", "MyDoom"]
showTags: false
hideBackToTop: false
# fediverse: "@username@instance.url"
draft: true
---


In 2004, a computer worm [increased average webpage loading speed by 50% and caused global internet speeds to slow by up to 10%](https://www.eweek.com/security/mydoom-slows-web-performance/).

1/10 emails contain worm

### Initial attack

#### 26 January 2004

The MyDoom virus is detected. slow loading speed

#### One day after the initial attack

SCO Group offers $250,000 reward for any info leading to the worms arrest

#### Two days after the initial attack

Second version of the worm is discovered

this is the peak. roughly 1/5 emails contain the virus

#### Three days after the initial attack

The spreed of MyDoom begines to decline

Microsoft offers$250,000 reward for Mydoom.B

#### Five days after the initial attack

https://practical-tech.com/2004/02/01/scos-mydoom-ddos-hammering-begins/

https://seclists.org/fulldisclosure/2004/Jan/1342

---

### who

### what

MyDoom(MyDoom.A)

MyDoom.B

Doomjuice

MyDoom U, V, W, X appear

MyDoom AO


### where

### when

MyDoom virus identified 26 jan 2004
27 of jan, SCO Group offers the 

### why

### how

MyDoom would send itself over email 

email subject
    test
    hi
    hello
    mail delivery system
    mail transaction failed
    server report
    status
    error

contains a malicious attachment
    pif
    scr
    exe
    cmd
    bat
    htm
    txt
    doc
    zip extensions

When executed, the worm opens up Windows' Notepad with garbage data in it. When spreading, the infectious email used to distribute the worm copies use variable subjects, bodies and attachment names.

The worm encrypts most of the strings in it's UPX-packed body with ROT13 method, i.e. the characters are rotated 13 locations to the right in the abecedary, starting from the beginning if the position is beyond the last letter.

Mydoom also performs a Distributed Denial-of-Service attack on www.sco.com. This attack starts on 1st of February.

The worm opens up a backdoor to infected computers. This is done by planting a new SHIMGAPI.DLL file to system32 directory and launching it as a child process of EXPLORER.EXE.